Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?			How is the tribute of this
Thou art more lovely and more temperate.			sonnet objectified rather than
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,		personalized?   
And summer's lease hath all too short a date.
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,		5
And often is his gold complexion dimmed,
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance or nature's changing course untrimmed;
But thy eternal summer shall not fade
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,		10
Nor shall death brag thou wander'st in his shade
When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st.
     So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
     So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.

Sonnet 55   

Not marble, nor the gilded monuments			How does this sonnet sustain
Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;		the theme of 18, yet alter the
But you shall shine more bright in these contents		tone with its imagery?
Than unswept stone besmear'd with sluttish time.
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,			5
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Nor Mars his sword nor war's quick fire shall burn
The living record of your memory.
'Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room	10
Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
     So, till the judgment that yourself arise,
     You live in this, and dwell in lover's eyes.

Sonnet 57

Being your slave what should I do but tend			Can this sonnet be read platonically   
Upon the hours, and times of your desire?			or must it be interpreted
I have no precious time at all to spend;			romantically?
Nor services to do, till you require.
Nor dare I chide the world without end hour,	5
Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
When you have bid your servant once adieu;
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,		10
But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought
Save, where you are, how happy you make those.
     So true a fool is love, that in your will,
     Though you do anything, he thinks no ill.

Sonnet 60 "Like as the Waves"	(Recording)
Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore, 		What acts as the personified enemy
So do our minutes hasten to their end, 			in this sonnet? How does the 
Each changing place with that which goes before		imagery of the poem convey the
In sequent toil all forwards do contend. 			realities of aging?
Nativity, once in the main of light, 			5
Crawls to maturity, wherewith, being crowned, 
Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight 
And Time that gave, doth now his gift confound. 
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth, 
And delves the parallels in beauty's brow, 		10
Feeds on the rarities of natures truth, 
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow; 
     And yet, to times, in hope, my verse shall stand, 
     Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand. 
Sonnet 73 – “That Time of Year Thou May Behold” 
That time of year thou mayst in me behold			How does the couplet appear act
When yellow leaves, or none, or few do hang		against the theme presented in the
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold		quatrains, & how do we explain this
Bare ruined choirs where late the sweet birds sang.		apparent contradiction?
In me thou seest the twilight of such day		5
As after sunset fadeth in the west,
Which by and by black night doth steal away,
Death's second self, which seals up all in rest.
In me thou seest the glowing of such fire
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,		10
As the deathbed whereon it must expire,
Consumed with that which it was nourished by.
     This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
     To love that well which thou must leave ere long.


Sonnet 79

Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,			Look up the word “muse.” What is the
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,		proper connotation here? How does the
But now my gracious numbers are decayed,		rival poet emerge in this poem? Is 
And my sick Muse doth give an other place.		There anything hypocritical in the 
I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument	5	speaker’s accusations and claims?
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent
He robs thee of, and pays it thee again.
He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word
From thy behaviour; beauty doth he give,	10
And found it in thy cheek; he can afford
No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live.
    Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
    Since what he owes thee, thou thyself dost pay.

Sonnet 100

Where art thou, Muse, that thou forget'st so long  	What is the poet’s expressed problem?
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might? 	What is the couplet’s proposed 
Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song, 	solution?
Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light? 
Return, forgetful Muse, and straight redeem 	5
In gentle numbers time so idly spent; 
Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem 
And gives thy pen both skill and argument. 
Rise, resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey, 
If Time have any wrinkle graven there; 	10
If any, be a satire to decay, 
And make Time's spoils despised every where. 
     Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life; 
     So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife.
   Sonnet 116 – “Let Me Not to the Marriage of True Minds”    (Recording)
Let me not to the marriage of true minds			Scholars frequently refer to this 
Admit impediments. Love is not love				sonnet as the ultimate expression of 
Which alters when it alteration finds,				idealized love. Why might this be the
Or bends with the remover to remove:			case? How can the last line be read
O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark,			5	for two distinctly different meanings?
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
It is the star to every wandering bark,
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Within his bending sickle's compass come;		10
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
But bears it out even to the edge of doom. 
    If this be error and upon me proved,
    I never writ, nor no man ever loved.
Sonnet 121
'Tis better to be vile than vile esteem'd,			What has the speaker of this poem 
When not to be receives reproach of being,			caught doing (textually support) and
And the just pleasure lost which is so deem'd		why is he so angry about it?
Not by our feeling but by others' seeing:
For why should others false adulterate eyes		5
Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
No, I am that I am, and they that level
At my abuses reckon up their own:			10
I may be straight, though they themselves be bevel;
By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown;
  Unless this general evil they maintain,
  All men are bad, and in their badness reign. 

Sonnet 129
The expense of spirit in a waste of shame			The opening line refers to the
Is lust in action; and till action, lust				belief that each sex act shortened a
Is perjured, murderous, bloody, full of blame,		man’s life. “Hell” is slang for the
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust,			female genetalia. STD’s were 
Enjoy'd no sooner but despised straight,		5	rampant in Shakespeare’s time, & he
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had			was very likely infected. What is the
Past reason hated, as a swallow'd bait				speaker’s attitude towards his lust?
On purpose laid to make the taker mad;
Mad in pursuit and in possession so;
Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme;		10
A bliss in proof, and proved, a very woe;
Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream.
  All this the world well knows; yet none knows well
  To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell. 
Sonnet 130
My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun; 			How does this sonnet subvert the 
Coral is far more red than her lips' red; 			traditional love poem? Specifically,
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun; 		consider the attributes the poet
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head. 		comments on.
I have seen roses demasked, red and white, 		5
But no such roses see I in her cheeks; 
And in some perfumes is there more delight 
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks. 
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know 
That music hath a far more pleasing sound; 		10
I grant I never saw a goddess go; 
My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground. 
      And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare 
      As any she belied with false compare.

Sonnet 144
Two loves I have of comfort and despair,			How does this sonnet seem to be a 
Which like two spirits do suggest me still:			direct commentary on the speaker’s
The better angel is a man right fair,				love life?
The worser spirit a woman colour'd ill.
To win me soon to hell, my female evil		5
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
And whether that my angel be turn'd fiend
Suspect I may, but not directly tell;			10
But being both from me, both to each friend,
I guess one angel in another's hell:
  Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt,
  Till my bad angel fire my good one out. 
John Donne was born in 1572 in London, England. He is known as the founder of the Metaphysical Poets, a term created by Samuel Johnson, an eighteenth-century English essayist, poet, and philosopher. The loosely associated group also includes George Herbert, Richard Crashaw, Andrew Marvell, and John Cleveland. The Metaphysical Poets are known for their ability to startle the reader and coax new perspective through paradoxical images, subtle argument, inventive syntax, and imagery from art, philosophy, and religion using an extended metaphor known as a conceit. Donne reached beyond the rational and hierarchical structures of the seventeenth century with his exacting and ingenious conceits, advancing the exploratory spirit of his time.
Donne entered the world during a period of theological and political unrest for both England and France; a Protestant massacre occurred on Saint Bartholomew's day in France; while in England, the Catholics were the persecuted minority. Born into a Roman Catholic family, Donne's personal relationship with religion was tumultuous and passionate, and at the center of much of his poetry. He studied at both Oxford and Cambridge Universities in his early teen years. He did not take a degree at either school, because to do so would have meant subscribing to the Thirty-nine Articles, the doctrine that defined Anglicanism. At age twenty he studied law at Lincoln's Inn. Two years later he succumbed to religious pressure and joined the Anglican Church after his younger brother, convicted for his Catholic loyalties, died in prison. Donne wrote most of his love lyrics, erotic verse, and some sacred poems in the 1590's, creating two major volumes of work: Satires, and Songs and Sonnets. 
In 1598, after returning from a two-year naval expedition against Spain, Donne was appointed private secretary to Sir Thomas Egerton. While sitting in Queen Elizabeth's last Parliament in 1601, Donne secretly married Anne More, the sixteen-year-old niece of Lady Egerton. Donne's father-in-law disapproved of the marriage. As punishment, he did not provide a dowry for the couple and had Donne briefly imprisoned. This left the couple isolated and dependent on friends, relatives, and patrons. Donne suffered social and financial instability in the years following his marriage, exacerbated by the birth of many children. He continued to write and published the Divine Poems in 1607. In Pseudo-Martyr, published in 1610, Donne displayed his extensive knowledge of the laws of the Church and state, arguing that Roman Catholics could support James I without compromising their faith. In 1615, James I pressured him to enter the Anglican Ministry by declaring that Donne could not be employed outside of the Church. He was appointed Royal Chaplain later that year. His wife, aged thirty-three, died in 1617, shortly after giving birth to their twelfth child, a stillborn. The Holy Sonnets are also attributed to this phase of his life. 
In 1621 he became dean of Saint Paul's Cathedral. In his later years, Donne's writing reflected his fear of his inevitable death. He wrote his private prayers, Devotions upon Emergent Occasions, during a period of severe illness and published them in 1624. His learned, charismatic, and inventive preaching made him a highly influential presence in London. Best known for his vivacious, compelling style and thorough examination of mortal paradox, John Donne died in London in 1631.

  Death, Be Not Proud (Holy Sonnet 10)		 
Death, be not proud, though some have called thee 		The poet’s background reveals
Mighty and dreadful, for thou are not so; 			a noteworthy irony about the 
For those whom thou think'st thou dost overthrow 		message of the poem and the conceit
Die not, poor Death, nor yet canst thou kill me. 		it creates.
From rest and sleep, which but thy pictures be, 		5
Much pleasure; then from thee much more must flow, 
And soonest our best men with thee do go, 
Rest of their bones, and soul's delivery. 
Thou'art slave to fate, chance, kings, and desperate men, 
And dost with poison, war, and sickness dwell, 		10
And poppy'or charms can make us sleep as well 
And better than thy stroke; why swell'st thou then? 
One short sleep past, we wake eternally, 
And death shall be no more; Death, thou shalt die.

"Unholy Sonnet 14" by Mark Jarman

After the praying, after the hymn-singing,			What appears to be the specific
After the sermon's trenchant commentary			religious orientation of the speaker?
On the world's ills, which make ours secondary,		Note pronoun shifts. Who is the 
After communion, after the hand-wringing,			target of the sonnet’s commentary?
And after peace descends upon us, bringing			5
Our eyes up to regard the sanctuary	
And how the light swords through it, and how, scary
In their sheer numbers, motes of dust ride, clinging--
There is, as doctors say about some pain,
Discomfort knowing that despite your prayers,		10
Your listening and rejoicing, your small part
In this communal stab at coming clean,
There is one stubborn remnant of your cares
Intact. There is still murder in your heart.

Percy Bysshe Shelley 
On July 8, 1822, shortly before his thirtieth birthday, Shelley was drowned in a storm while attempting to sail from Leghorn to La Spezia, Italy, in his schooner, the Don Juan.






“Ozymandias”

I met a traveller from an antique land 			What is it that remains of the great 
Who said: Two vast and trunkless legs of stone 		Ozymandias, a king of kings? What 
Stand in the desert . . . Near them, on the sand, 		might the sonnet suggest about the
Half sunk, a shattered visage lies, whose frown, 		durability of legacy?
And wrinkled lip, and sneer of cold command, 	5
Tell that its sculptor well those passions read 
Which yet survive, stamped on these lifeless things, 
The hand that mocked them, and the heart that fed: 
And on the pedestal these words appear: 
"My name is Ozymandias, king of kings: 		10
Look on my works, ye Mighty, and despair!" 
Nothing beside remains. Round the decay 
Of that colossal wreck, boundless and bare 
The lone and level sands stretch far away. 






“title???”

Nor happiness, nor majesty, nor fame,		After evaluation, what title would you
Nor peace, nor strength, nor skill in arms or arts,	give to this sonnet & why? (i.e. How would
Shepherd those herds whom tyranny makes tame;	you conclude the statement, “This 
Verse echoes not one beating of their hearts,		sonnet is a meditation on....”?)
History is but the shadow of their shame,		5
Art veils her glass, or from the pageant starts
As to oblivion their blind millions fleet,
Staining that Heaven with obscene imagery
Of their own likeness. What are numbers knit
By force or custom? Man who man would be,	10
Must rule the empire of himself; in it
Must be supreme, establishing his throne
On vanquished will, quelling the anarchy
Of hopes and fears, being himself alone.







Edna St. Vincent Millay
Poet and playwright Edna St. Vincent Millay was born in Rockland, Maine, on February 22, 1892. Her mother, Cora, raised her three daughters on her own after asking her husband to leave the family home in 1899. Cora encouraged her girls to be ambitious and self-sufficient, teaching them an appreciation of music and literature from an early age. In 1912, at her mother's urging, Millay entered her poem "Renascence" into a contest: she won fourth place and publication in The Lyric Year, bringing her immediate acclaim and a scholarship to Vassar. There, she continued to write poetry and became involved in the theater. She also developed intimate relationships with several women while in school, including the English actress Wynne Matthison. In 1917, the year of her graduation, Millay published her first book, Renascence and Other Poems. At the request of Vassar's drama department, she also wrote her first verse play, The Lamp and the Bell (1921), a work about love between women.
Millay, whose friends called her "Vincent," then moved to New York's Greenwich Village, where she led a notoriously Bohemian life. She lived in a nine-foot-wide attic and wrote anything she could find an editor willing to accept. She and the other writers of Greenwich Village were, according to Millay herself, "very, very poor and very, very merry." She joined the Provincetown Players in their early days, and befriended writers such as Witter Bynner, Edmund Wilson, Susan Glaspell, and Floyd Dell, who asked for Millay's hand in marriage. Millay, who was openly bisexual, refused, despite Dell's attempts to persuade her otherwise. That same year Millay published A Few Figs from Thistles (1920), a volume of poetry which drew much attention for its controversial descriptions of female sexuality and feminism. In 1923 her fourth volume of poems, The Harp Weaver, was awarded the Pulitzer Prize. In addition to publishing three plays in verse, Millay also wrote the libretto of one of the few American grand operas, The King's Henchman (1927).
Millay married Eugen Boissevain, a self-proclaimed feminist and widower of Inez Milholland, in 1923. Boissevain gave up his own pursuits to manage Millay's literary career, setting up the readings and public appearances for which Millay grew quite famous. According to Millay's own accounts, the couple acted liked two bachelors, remaining "sexually open" throughout their twenty-six-year marriage, which ended with Boissevain's death in 1949. Edna St. Vincent Millay died in 1950.
“I Shall Forget You Presently My Dear” by Edna St. Vincent Millay       (Recording)
I shall forget you presently, my dear,			What point in the relationship is 
So make the most of this, your little day,		depicted here: beginning, middle, or
Your little month, your little half a year,		end? What textual detail supports this?
Ere I forget, or die, or move away,
And we are done forever; by and by		5
I shall forget you, as I said, but now,
If you entreat me with your loveliest lie
I will protest you with my favorite vow.
I would indeed that love were longer-lived,
And vows were not so brittle as they are,	10
But so it is, and nature has contrived
To struggle on without a break thus far,—
Whether or not we find what we are seeking
Is idle, biologically speaking.
“What Lips My Lips Have Kissed, and Where, and Why” by Edna St. Vincent Millay
What lips my lips have kissed, and where, and why, 		How might this particular 
I have forgotten, and what arms have lain 				sonnet relate to the one that
Under my head till morning; but the rain 				precedes it if the speaker is
Is full of ghosts tonight, that tap and sigh 				the same person?
Upon the glass and listen for reply, 			5
And in my heart there stirs a quiet pain 
For unremembered lads that not again 
Will turn to me at midnight with a cry. 
Thus in winter stands the lonely tree, 
Nor knows what birds have vanished one by one, 	10
Yet knows its boughs more silent than before: 
I cannot say what loves have come and gone, 
I only know that summer sang in me 
A little while, that in me sings no more.
“I Will Put Chaos into Fourteen Lines” by Edna St. Vincent Millay

I will put Chaos into fourteen lines 				Does the conceit of this sonnet
And keep him there; and let him thence escape 			effectively convey the
If he be lucky; let him twist, and ape 				challenge a poet encounters
Flood, fire, and demon --- his adroit designs 			when composing a sonnet?
Will strain to nothing in the strict confines 	5
Of this sweet order, where, in pious rape, 
I hold his essence and amorphous shape, 
Till he with Order mingles and combines. 
Past are the hours, the years of our duress, 
His arrogance, our awful servitude: 		10
I have him. He is nothing more nor less 
Than something simple not yet understood; 
I shall not even force him to confess; 
Or answer. I will only make him good.

“Truth and Beauty” by Elizabeth Akers Allen
Strange Truth and Beauty are enemies, 				Is the irony of this sonnet
Treading forever on each other's toes! 				reminiscent of any of 
Strange rhymes are always made of that which is 			Shakespeare’s? Where is the
Too false or silly to be said in prose! 					pun in this poem?
Now here's a sonnet by our village poet 			5
"Inscribed to Kate," in most romantic style, 
Whereas,--and one with half an eye might know it,-- 
He means Sophronia Tompkins, all the while. 
He sings of "golden curls." If fiery tresses 
Had heat to match their hue, her hair would burn;-- 		10
He mentions "airy grace,"--while she possesses 
A form as shapeless as an old-time churn, 
 Heavens! after this I never shall inquire 
Why people always call the poet's song a LYRE! 

William Wordsworth






The world is too much with us; late and soon,			How is it that this sonnet 
Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers;			might be more relevant today
Little we see in Nature that is ours;					than when it was composed?
We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon!
This Sea that bares her bosom to the moon,		5
The winds that will be howling at all hours,
And are up-gathered now like sleeping flowers,
For this, for everything, we are out of tune;
It moves us not.--Great God! I'd rather be
A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn; (1)		10
So might I, standing on this pleasant lea, (2)
Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn;
Have sight of Proteus (3) rising from the sea;
Or hear old Triton (4) blow his wreathed horn.
(1) Brought up in an outdated religion.  (2) Meadow.  (3) Greek sea god capable of taking many shapes.  (4) Another sea god, often depicted as trumpeting on a shell. Also the Little Mermaid’s dad.

Composed Upon Westminster Bridge, September 3, 1802
Earth has not anything to show more fair:
Dull would he be of soul who could pass by
A sight so touching in its majesty:
This City now doth, like a garment, wear
The beauty of the morning; silent, bare,
Ships, towers, domes, theatres, and temples lie
Open unto the fields, and to the sky;
All bright and glittering in the smokeless air.
Never did sun more beautifully steep
In his first splendour, valley, rock, or hill;
Ne'er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep!
The river glideth at his own sweet will:
Dear God! the very houses seem asleep;
And all that mighty heart is lying still!

John Milton
John Milton was born in London on December 9, 1608, into a middle-class family. He was educated at St. Paul's School, then at Christ's College, Cambridge, where he began to write poetry in Latin, Italian, and English and prepared to enter the clergy. After university, however, he abandoned his plans to join the priesthood and spent the next six years in his father's country home in Buckinghamshire, reading extensively in the classics and writing "On the Morning of Christ's Nativity" (1629), "On Shakespeare" (1630), "L'Allegro" and "Il Penseroso" (1631), and Lycidas (1637). Milton traveled in France and Italy during this time and met Galileo Galilei, who appears in Milton's tract against censorship, "Areopagitica." In 1642, he married Mary Powell; even though they were estranged for most of their marriage, she bore him three daughters and a son before her death in 1652. < in Minshull Elizabeth and 1658, birth giving died who 1656, Woodcock more—Katherine twice marry would> 
During the English Civil War, Milton championed the cause of the Puritans and Oliver Cromwell, writing a series of pamphlets on divorce, the freedom of the press, and support for the regicides. He also served as secretary for foreign languages in Cromwell's government. During this time, Milton was steadily losing his eyesight, going completely blind in 1651, but he continued his duties with the aid of Andrew Marvell and other assistants. After the Restoration of Charles II to the throne in 1660, Milton was arrested as a defender of the Commonwealth, fined, and soon released. He lived the rest of his life in seclusion in the country, completing the epic poem Paradise Lost (1667) and writing Paradise Regained (1671) and Samson Agonistes (1671).
Paradise Lost, which chronicles the fall of Adam and his expulsion from Eden, is widely regarded as his masterpiece and one of the greatest epic poems in world literature. The poem had wide-reaching effect, inspiring Alexander Pope's The Rape of the Lock and John Keats's Endymion and deeply influencing Percy Bysshe Shelley and William Blake. Milton is thought by many to be the greatest English poet after Shakespeare. Milton died on November 8, 1674, in Buckinghamshire, England.





When I consider how my light is spent, 				The poet’s background is vital to your
E're half my days, in this dark world and wide, 			conception of this sonnet.
And that one Talent which is death to hide, 
Lodg'd with me useless, though my Soul more bent 
To serve therewith my Maker, and present 		5
My true account, least he returning chide, 
Doth God exact day labour, light deny'd, 
I fondly ask; But patience to prevent 
That murmur, soon replies, God doth not need 
Either man's work or his own gifts, who best 	10
Bear his milde yoak, they serve him best, his State 
Is Kingly. Thousands at his bidding speed 
And post o're Land and Ocean without rest: 
They also serve who only stand and waite. 
1] The date of composition is uncertain. V Milton's blindness, to which this is the first reference in his poetry, became virtually complete in 1652, but if the arrangement of his sonnets is (as it elsewhere appears to be) chronological, the date must be, like that of Sonnet XVIII, 1655. First printed in Poems, 1673. Light: power of vision, to be taken in conjunction with "this dark world." In a letter of 1654 Milton refers to a very faint susceptibility to light still remaining to him.
2] Ere half my days: we must not expect mathematical accuracy. But if we remember that Milton is speaking about his career in God's service, take its beginning in the avowed dedication to that service in Sonnet VII (1632), and assume the scriptural life-span of three score years and ten (which would mean life till 1678), 1652 falls before, and even 1655 does not extend beyond, the half-way mark of Milton's expected career of service.
3-6] The allusion is to the parable of the talents (Matthew 25:14-30); death, like the outer darkness into which the unprofitable servant was cast, stands for the utmost in punishment; the Talent was a measure of weight and hence of value; there is here, of course, a play on the word in its modern sense of mental gift or endowment, in Milton's case his gift of poetry.   8] fondly: foolishly.
Dante Gabriel Rossetti

Gabriel Charles Dante Rossetti was born in London on 12 May, 1828, son of the Italian-born poet Gabriel Rossetti. He was educated there at King's College and the Royal Academy. At the academy he met the painters Sir John Everett Millais and Holman Hunt, with whom he founded the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood. Rossetti was strongly attracted to the dramatic and the supernatural. Among his earliest paintings was a scene of the annunciation, Ecce Ancilla Domini. His art subsequently developed through other phases, in which the sense of human beauty, intensity of abstract expression, and richness of colour were leading elements. 
Rossetti began writing poetry about the same time that he took definitely to the study of painting. Two of his best known poems, "The Portrait" and "The Blessed Damozel", were written in 1842. He made a number of translations from Dante and other Italian writers, published in 1861 as The Early Italian Poets. 
Rossetti's later years were marred by sorrow and mental depression, relieved only by the creative play of his mind. In 1860 he had married a milliner, Elizabeth Eleanor Siddal, whose beauty he immortalized in many of his best-known paintings, such as Mary Magdalene at the House of Simon the Pharisee. Within two years the invalid Elizabeth died, and Rossetti was grief stricken by the tragedy. In addition he was troubled by a bitter attack that had been made on the morality of his poems in an article entitled "The Fleshy School of Poetry", published in The Contemporary Review in October 1871. Rossetti's rebuttal was published as "The Stealthy School of Criticism" in the Athenaeum in December 1871. 
Rossetti continued almost to the last to produce paintings and poems. In 1881 he published Ballads and Sonnets, which contained some of his finest work, "Rose Mary", "The White Ship", "The King's Tragedy", and the sonnet sequence "The House of Life". Of his later paintings, which are murky and dreamlike, two of the best are Dante's Dream and Proserpina. He died in Berchington on 10 April, 1882.
“A Sonnet”
A Sonnet is a moment's monument,-- 					Does the poem effectively convey
Memorial from the Soul's eternity 						a definition of what a sonnet does?
To one dead deathless hour. Look that it be, 					As a sonnet, does it follow its own
Whether for lustral rite or dire portent, 					ideals?
Of its own arduous fulness reverent: 		5
Carve it in ivory or in ebony, 
As Day or Night may rule; and let Time see 
Its flowering crest impearled and orient. 
A Sonnet is a coin: its face reveals 
The soul,--its converse, to what Power 'tis due:-- 	10
Whether for tribute to the august appeals 		
Of Life, or dower in Love's high retinue, 
It serve, or, 'mid the dark wharf's cavernous breath, 
In Charon's palm it pay the toll to Death. 

“Sonnet” by Billy Collins
All we need is fourteen lines, well, thirteen now,				Is it right to even call this poem
and after this one just a dozen						a sonnet?
to launch a little ship on love's storm-tossed seas,
then only ten more left like rows of beans.
How easily it goes unless you get Elizabethan	5
and insist the iambic bongos must be played
and rhymes positioned at the ends of lines,
one for every station of the cross.
But hang on here wile we make the turn
into the final six where all will be resolved,		10
where longing and heartache will find an end,
where Laura will tell Petrarch to put down his pen,
take off those crazy medieval tights,
blow out the lights, and come at last to bed.


 “The New Colossus” by Emma Lazarus
Not like the brazen giant of Greek fame, 				In addition to being a sonnet,
With conquering limbs astride from land to land; 			what kind of lyric poem is
Here at our sea-washed, sunset gates shall stand 			this an example of?
A mighty woman with a torch, whose flame 
Is the imprisoned lightning, and her name 		5
Mother of Exiles. From her beacon-hand 
Glows world-wide welcome; her mild eyes command 
The air-bridged harbor that twin cities frame. 
"Keep, ancient lands, your storied pomp!" cries she 
With silent lips. "Give me your tired, your poor, 	10
Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, 
The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. 
Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me, 
I lift my lamp beside the golden door!" 